---
title: Software-Defined Networking
tags: [networking, code]
---

I took a fun course on Software-Defined Networking (with P4), and later also wrote my Master thesis about SDN. Here is what I did and learned.

<!--more-->

## Master thesis: FPGA-based packet forwarding

<section class="section--center mdl-grid">

{% include card.html type='repo'
    url='https://github.com/AnotherKamila/scion-p4netfpga'
    title='The code'
    description="A P4-based border router for the SCION future Internet architecture, runnable in software or on the NetFPGA SUME. The NetFPGA is a board capable of running at 40Gbps, and a prototype P4 compiler is available for it. I did some horrible things to make the very prototype compiler work, and learned a lot about FPGAs in the process."
    grid=8
    grid_tablet=8
%}

{% include card.html type='slides'
    url='/talking/scion/thesis'
    title='Thesis Defence Talk'
    description="Presentation I gave for my thesis defence. Goes into implementation details."
    grid=4
%}

{% include card.html type='article'
    url='https://github.com/AnotherKamila/scion-p4netfpga/raw/master/doc/thesis/thesis.pdf'
    title='Thesis'
    description="The thesis itself, contains a lot of information + context."
    grid=4
%}

{% include card.html type='slides'
    url='/talking/help-i-have-an-fpga'
    title='Help! I have an FPGA!'
    description="Talk that focuses less on the implementation details and more on what I learned as a software engineer working with an FPGA and P4."
    grid=8
%}

</section>


## Course project: Load balancer

<section class="section--center mdl-grid">

{% include card.html type='repo'
    url='https://github.com/anotherkamila/sdn-loadbalancer'
    title='The project'
    description="I created a load balancer able to distribute the traffic on real-time server metrics, at line rate. The data plane uses fun data structures such as Bloom filters and fights the P4 compiler in terrible ways. And I think the code is readable and pretty!"
    grid=6
    grid_tablet=8
%}

{% include card.html type='slides'
    url='/talking/sdn-loadbalancer'
    title='Presentation'
    description="Describes how my load balancer works. Has lots of diagrams!"
    grid=3
%}

{% include card.html type='article'
    url='https://github.com/AnotherKamila/sdn-loadbalancer/raw/master/report/report.pdf'
    title='Report'
    description="Explains things in more detail than the presentation, plus contains evaluation."
    grid=3
%}

</section>

## P4 notes

### Useful links:

* P4 spec: <https://p4.org/p4-spec/docs/P4-16-v1.0.0-spec.html>
* P4 includes: <https://github.com/p4lang/p4c/blob/master/p4include/>
  * standard_metadata_t: <https://github.com/p4lang/p4c/blob/master/p4include/v1model.p4#L32>
  * core: <https://github.com/p4lang/p4c/blob/master/p4include/core.p4>

### How to...

* work with tables: <https://p4.org/p4-spec/docs/P4-16-v1.0.0-spec.html#sec-tables>

* add headers:
  * order is the expected one: outside to inside
  * before setting stuff in a header, it must be .setValid()
  * when cloning packets, standard_metadata aren't copied => if I need that stuff later, I have to carry them around in metadata
* add an extern to the compiler and emulator: <https://github.com/joelwanner/p4c/compare/master...joelwanner:extern>, <https://github.com/joelwanner/behavioral-model/compare/master...joelwanner:extern>

### Multicast

* **multicast group** is a thingy with an ID, created via _control plane_ and used from _data plane_
  * CLI for creating it: `mc_mgrp_create <group_id>`
  * using it from P4 code: `standard_metadata.mcast_grp = 47`
* **multicast node** is for informing the switch that this port can be used for multicast. Nodes are associated with (/put into) groups. Usually there would be a 1:1 correspondence with a port, but it can be multiple ports too -- that makes sense if these ports will always be used together.
  * CLI for making a multicast node from a port: `mc_node_create <node_id> <port_number(s)>`
    * this returns a `node handle ID`, which is numbered from 0 in the order it was created ==> first node will be handle ID 0, second handle ID 1...
    * in order to make it even more confusing, `node_id` is actually called "replication ID"
    * **multicast nodes** are assigned into **multicast groups** by the control plane via CLI: `mc_node_associate <mcast_grp_id> <node_handle_id>` (many nodes to 1 group)  

therefore:

1. create group in control plane: `mc_mgrp_create 1`
2. create multicast node(s): `mc_node_create 0 1 2 3`
3. put nodes into groups: `mc_node_associate 1 0`
